Before Tangiers, well met braveAustria
Arthur, that greatforerunner of thy blood,
Richard, that robb'd thelion of his heart
And fought the holy warsin Palestine,
By this brave duke cameearly to his grave:
And for amends to hisposterity,
At our importance hitheris he come,
To spread his colours,boy, in thy behalf,
And to rebuke theusurpation
Of thy unnatural uncle,English John:
Embrace him, love him,give him welcome hither.
God shall forgive youCoeur-de-lion's death
The rather that you givehis offspring life,
Shadowing their rightunder your wings of war:
I give you welcome with apowerless hand,
But with a heart full ofunstained love:
Welcome before the gatesof Angiers, duke.
A noble boy! Who would notdo thee right?
Upon thy cheek lay I thiszealous kiss,
As seal to this indentureof my love,
That to my home I will nomore return,
Till Angiers and the rightthou hast in France,
Together with that pale,that white-faced shore,
Whose foot spurns back theocean's roaring tides
And coops from other landsher islanders,
Even till that England,hedged in with the main,
That water-walled bulwark,still secure
And confident from foreignpurposes,
Even till that utmostcorner of the west
Salute thee for her king:till then, fair boy,
Will I not think of home,but follow arms.
O, take his mother'sthanks, a widow's thanks,
Till your strong hand shallhelp to give him strength
To make a more requital toyour love!
The peace of heaven is theirsthat lift their swords
In such a just andcharitable war.
(crowd chants) Arthur! Arthur!
Well then, to work: ourcannon shall be bent
Against the brows of thisresisting town.
Call for our chiefest menof discipline,
To cull the plots of bestadvantages:
We'll lay before this townour royal bones,
Wade to the market-placein Frenchmen's blood,
But we will make itsubject to this boy.
Stay for an answer to yourembassy,
Lest unadvised you stainyour swords with blood:
My Lord Chatillon may fromEngland bring,
That right in peace whichhere we urge in war,
And then we shall repenteach drop of blood
Which hot rash haste soindirectly shed.
A wonder, lady! lo, uponthy wish,
Our messenger Chatillon isarrived!
What England says, saybriefly, gentle lord;
We coldly pause for thee;Chatillon, speak.
Then turn your forces fromthis paltry siege
And stir them up against amightier task.
England, impatient of yourjust demands,
Hath put himself in arms:the adverse winds,
Whose leisure I havestay'd, have given him time
To land his legions all assoon as I;
His marches are expedientto this town,
His forces strong, hissoldiers confident.
With him along is come themother-queen,
An Ate, stirring him toblood and strife;
With her her niece, theLady Blanch of Spain;
With them a bastard of theking's deceased,
And all the unsettledhumours of the land,
Rash, inconsiderate, fieryvoluntaries,
With ladies' faces andfierce dragons' spleens,
Have sold their fortunesat their native homes,
Bearing their birthrightsproudly on their backs,
To make hazard of newfortunes here:
In brief, a braver choiceof dauntless spirits
Than now the Englishbottoms have waft o'er
Did nearer float upon theswelling tide,
To do offence and scath inChristendom.
♪Drum beats
The interruption of theirchurlish drums
Cuts off more circumstance:they are at hand,
To parley or to fight;therefore prepare.
How much unlook'd for isthis expedition!
By how much unexpected, byso much
We must awake endavour fordefence;
For courage mounteth withoccasion:
Let them be welcome then:we are prepared.
Peace be to France, ifFrance in peace permit
Our just and linealentrance to our own;
If not, bleed France, andpeace ascend to heaven,
Whiles we, God'swrathful agent,
do correct their proud contemptthat beats His peace to heaven.
Peace be to England, ifthat war return
From France to England,there to live in peace.
England we love; and forthat England's sake
With burden of our armourhere we sweat.
This toil of ours shouldbe a work of thine;
But thou from lovingEngland art so far,
That thou hast under-wroughthis lawful king
Cut off the sequence ofposterity,
Out-faced infant state anddone a rape
Upon the maiden virtue ofthe crown.
Look here upon thy brotherGeffrey's face;
These eyes, these brows,were moulded out of his:
This little abstract dothcontain that large
Which died in Geffrey, andthe hand of time
Shall draw this brief intoas huge a volume.
That Geffrey was thy elderbrother born,
And this his son; Englandwas Geffrey's right
And this is Geffrey's: inthe name of God
How comes it then thatthou art call'd a king,
When living blood doth inthese temples beat,
Which owe the crown thatthou o'ermasterest?
From whom hast thou thisgreat commission, France,
To draw my answer from thyarticles?
From that supernal judge,which stirs good thoughts
In any breast of strongauthority,
To look into the blots andstains of right:
That judge hath made meguardian to this boy:
By whose warrant Iimpeach thy wrong
And by whose help I meanto chastise it.
Alack, thou dost usurpauthority.
Excuse; it is to beatusurping down.
Who is it thou dost callusurper, France?
Let me make answer; thyusurping son.
Out, insolent! thy bastardshall be king,
That thou mayst be a queen,and cheque the world!
My bed was ever to thy son
as true as thine wasto thy husband;
and this boy liker in featureto his father Geffrey
Than thou and John inmanners; being as like
As rain to water, or devilto his dam.
My boy a bastard! By my soul,
I think his father neverwas so true begot:
It cannot be, an if thouwert his mother.
There's a good mother, boy,that blots thy father.
There's a good grandam,boy, that would blot thee.
Peace!
Hear the crier.
What the devil art thou?
One that will play thedevil, sir, with you,
An a' may catch your hideand you alone:
You are the hare of whomthe proverb goes,
Whose valour plucks deadlions by the beard;
I'll smoke your skin-coat,an I catch you right;
Look to't Sirrah;i' faith, I will, i' faith.
O, well did he become thatlion's robe
That did disrobe the lionof that robe!
It lies as sightly on theback of him
As great Alcides' showsupon an ass:
But, ass, I'll take thatburthen from your back,
Or lay on that shall makeyour shoulders crack.
What craker is this samethat deafs our ears
With this abundance ofsuperfluous breath?
Lewis, determine what weshall do straight.
Women and fools, break offyour conference.
King John, this is thevery sum of all;
England and Ireland,Anjou, Touraine, Maine,
In right of Arthur do Iclaim of thee:
Wilt thou resign them andlay down thy arms?
My life as soon: I do defythee, France.
Arthur of Bretagne, yieldthee to my hand;
And out of my dear loveI'll give thee more
Than e'er the coward handof France can win:
Submit thee, boy.
Come to thy grandam,child.
Do, child, go to itgrandam, child:
Give grandam kingdom, andit grandam will
Give it a plum, a cherry,and a fig:
There's a good grandam.
Good my mother, peace!
I would that I were lowlaid in my grave:
I am not worth this coilthat's made for me.
His mother shames him so,poor boy, he weeps.
Now shame upon you,whether she does or no!
His grandam's wrongs, andnot his mother's shames,
Draws those heaven-movingpearls from his poor eyes,
Which heaven shall take innature of a fee;
Ay, with these crystal beadsheaven shall be bribed
To do him justice andrevenge on you.
Thou monstrous slandererof heaven and earth!
Thou monstrous injurer ofheaven and earth!
Call not me slanderer; thou andthine usurp the dominations,
royalties and rights ofthis oppressed boy:
this is thy eld'st son's son,
Infortunate in nothing butin thee:
Thy sins are visited inthis poor child;
The canon of the law islaid on him,
Being but the secondgeneration
Removed from thysin-conceiving womb.
Bedlam, have done.
I have but this to say,
That he is not onlyplagued for her sin,
But God hath made her sinand her the plague
On this removed issue,plague for her
And with her plague; hersin his injury,
Her injury the beadle toher sin,
All punish'd in the personof this child,
And all for her; a plagueupon her!
Thou unadvised scold, Ican produce a will
that bars the titleof thy son.
Ay, who doubts that? awill! a wicked will:
A woman's will; a canker'dgrandam's will!
Peace, lady! pause, or bemore temperate:
It ill beseems this presence
to cry aim to theseill-tuned repetitions.
Some trumpet summon hitherto the walls
These men of Angiers: letus hear them speak
Whose title they admit,Arthur's or John's.
♪Trumpet sounds.
Who is it that hath warn'dus to the walls?
'Tis France, for England.
England, for itself.
You men of Angiers, and myloving subjects--
You loving men of Angiers,Arthur's subjects,
Our trumpet call'd you tothis gentle parle--
For our advantage;therefore hear us first.
These flags of France,that are advanced here
Before the eye andprospect of your town,
Have hither march'd toyour endamagement:
The cannons have theirbowels full of wrath,
And ready mounted are theyto spit forth
Their iron indignation'gainst your walls:
All preparation for abloody siege
All merciless proceedingby these French
Confronts your city'seyes, your winking gates;
And but for our approachthose sleeping stones,
That as a waist dothgirdle you about,
By the compulsion of theirordinance
By this time from theirfixed beds of lime
Had been dishabited, andwide havoc made
For bloody power to rushupon your peace.
But on the sight of usyour lawful king,
Who painfully with muchexpedient march
Have brought a counterchequebefore your gates,
To save unscratch'd yourcity's threatened cheeks,
Behold, the French amazedvouchsafe a parle;
And now, instead ofbullets wrapp'd in fire,
To make a shaking fever inyour walls,
They shoot but calm wordsfolded up in smoke,
To make a faithless errorin your ears:
Which trust accordingly,kind citizens,
And let us in, your king,whose labour'd spirits,
Forwearied in this actionof swift speed,
Crave harbourage withinyour city walls.
When I have said, makeanswer to us both.
Lo, in this right hand,whose protection
Is most divinely vow'dupon the right
Of him it holds, standsyoung Plantagenet,
Son to the elder brotherof this man,
And king o'er him and allthat he enjoys:
For this down-troddenequity, we tread
In warlike march thesegreens before your town,
Being no further enemy to you
than the constraintof hospitable zeal
In the relief of thisoppressed child
Religiously provokes. Bepleased then to pay that duty
which you truly owe
To him that owes it, namelythis young prince:
And then our arms, like toa muzzled bear,
Save in aspect, hath alloffence seal'd up;
Our cannons' malice vainlyshall be spent
Against the invulnerableclouds of heaven;
And with a blessed andunvex'd retire,
With unhack'd swords andhelmets all unbruised,
We will bear home thatlusty blood again
Which here we came tospout against your town,
And leave your children,wives and you in peace.
But if you fondly pass ourproffer'd offer,
'Tis not the roundure of
your old-faced walls can hideyou from our messengers of war,
Though all these Englishand their discipline
Were harbour'd in theirrude circumference.
Then tell us, shall yourcity call us lord,
In that behalf which wehave challenged it?
Or shall we give thesignal to our rage
And stalk in blood to ourpossession?
In brief, we are the kingof England's subjects:
For him, and in his right,we hold this town.
Acknowledge then the king,and let me in.
That can we not; but hethat proves the king,
To him will we proveloyal: till that time
Have we ramm'd up ourgates against the world.
Doth not the crown ofEngland prove the king?
And if not that, I bringyou witnesses,
Twice fifteen thousandhearts of England's breed,--
Bastards, and else.
To verify our title withtheir lives.
As many and as well-bornbloods as these,--
Some bastards too.
Stand in his face tocontradict his claim.
Till you compound whoseright is worthiest,
We for the worthiest holdthe right from both.
Then God forgive the sinof all those souls
That to their everlastingresidence,
Before the dew of eveningfall, shall fleet,
In dreadful trial of ourkingdom's king!
Amen, amen! Mount,chevaliers! to arms!
Saint George, that swingedthe dragon, and e'er since
Sits on his horseback atmine hostess' door,
Teach us some fence!
Sirrah, were I at home,
At your den, sirrah, withyour lioness
I would set an ox-head toyour lion's hide,
And make a monster of you.
Peace! no more.
O tremble, for you hearthe lion roar.
Up higher to the plain;where we'll set forth
In best appointment allour regiments.
Speed then, to takeadvantage of the field.
It shall be so; and at theother hill
Command the rest to stand.God and our right!
♪Trumpets
You men of Angiers, openwide your gates,
And let young Arthur, Dukeof Bretagne, in,
Who by the hand of Francethis day hath made
Much work for tears inmany an English mother,
Whose sons lie scatteredon the bleeding ground;
Many a widow's husbandgrovelling lies,
Coldly embracing thediscolour'd earth;
And victory, with littleloss, doth play
Upon the dancing bannersof the French,
Who are at hand,triumphantly display'd,
To enter conquerors and toproclaim
Arthur of BretagneEngland's king and yours.
♪Trumpets
Rejoice, you men ofAngiers, ring your bells:
King John, your king andEngland's doth approach,
Commander of this hotmalicious day:
Their armours, that march'dhence so silver-bright,
Hither return all giltwith Frenchmen's blood;
There stuck no plume inany English crest
That is removed by a staffof France;
Our colours do return inthose same hands
That did display them whenwe first march'd forth;
And, like a jolly troop ofhuntsmen, come
Our lusty English, allwith purpled hands,
Dyed in the dyingslaughter of their foes:
Open your gates and givesthe victors way.
Heralds, from off ourtowers we might behold,
From first to last, theonset and retire
Of both your armies; whoseequality
By our best eyes cannot becensured:
Blood hath bought blood andblows have answered blows;
Strength match'd with strength,and power confronted power:
Both are alike; and bothalike we like.
One must prove greatest:while they weigh so even,
We hold our town forneither, yet for both.
France, hast thou yet moreblood to cast away?
Say, shall the current ofour right roam on?
Whose passage, vex'd withthy impediment,
Shall leave his nativechannel and o'erswell
With course disturb'd eventhy confining shores,
Unless thou let his silverwater keep
A peaceful progress to theocean.
England, thou hast notsaved one drop of blood,
In this hot trial, morethan we of France;
Rather, lost more. And bythis hand I swear,
That sways the earth thisclimate overlooks,
Before we will lay downour just-borne arms,
We'll put thee down, 'gainstwhom these arms we bear,
Or add a royal number tothe dead,
Gracing the scroll thattells of this war's loss
With slaughter coupled tothe name of kings.
Ha, majesty! how high thyglory towers,
When the rich blood ofkings is set on fire!
O, now doth Death line hisdead chaps with steel;
The swords of soldiers arehis teeth, his fangs;
And now he feasts, mousingthe flesh of men,
In undetermineddifferences of kings.
Why stand these royalfronts amazed thus?
Cry, 'havoc!' kings; backto the stained field,
You equal potents, fierykindled spirits!
Then let confusion of one partconfirm the other's peace:
Till then, blows,blood and death!
Whose party do thetownsmen yet admit?
Speak, citizens, forEngland; who's your king?
The king of England; whenwe know the king.
Know him in us, that herehold up his right.
In us, that are our owngreat deputy
And bear possession of ourperson here,
Lord of our presence,Angiers, and of you.
A greater power then wedenies all this;
And till it be undoubted,we do lock
Our former scruple in ourstrong-barr'd gates;
King'd of our fears, untilour fears, resolved,
Be by some certain kingpurged and deposed.
By heaven, these scroyles ofAngiers flout you, kings,
And stand securely ontheir battlements,
As in a theatre, whencethey gape and point
At your industrious scenesand acts of death.
Your royal presences beruled by me:
Do like the mutines ofJerusalem,
Be friends awhile and bothconjointly bend
Your sharpest deeds ofmalice against this town:
By east and west letFrance and England mount
Their battering cannoncharged to the mouths,
Till their soul-fearingclamours have brawl'd down
The flinty ribs of thiscontemptuous city:
I'ld play incessantly uponthese jades,
Even till unfenceddesolation
Leave them as naked as thevulgar air.
That done, dissever yourunited strengths,
And part your mingledcolours once again;
Turn face to face andbloody point to point;
Then, in a moment, Fortuneshall cull forth
Out of one side her happyminion,
To whom in favour sheshall give the day,
And kiss him with aglorious victory.
How like you this wildcounsel, mighty states?
Smacks it not something ofthe policy?
Now, by the sky that hangsabove our heads,
I like it well. Say France,shall we knit our powers
And lay this Angiers evento the ground;
Then after fight who shallbe king of it?
An if thou hast the mettleof a king,
Being wronged as we are bythis peevish town, why then,
Turn thou the mouth of thyartillery,
As we will ours, againstthese saucy walls;
And when that we havedash'd them to the ground,
Why then defy each otherand pell-mell
Make work upon ourselves,for heaven or hell.
Let it be so. Say, wherewill you assault?
We from the west will senddestruction
Into this city's bosom.
I from the north.
Our thunder from the south
Shall rain their drift ofbullets on this town.
O prudent discipline! Fromnorth to south:
Austria and France shootin each other's mouth:
I'll stir them to it.Come, away, away!
Hear us, great kings:vouchsafe awhile to stay,
And I shall show you peaceand fair-faced league;
Win you this city withoutstroke or wound;
Rescue those breathinglives to die in beds,
That here come sacrificesfor the field:
Persever not, but hear me,mighty kings.
Speak on with favour; weare bent to hear.
That daughter there ofSpain, the Lady Blanch,
Is niece to England: lookupon the years
Of Lewis the Dauphin andthat lovely maid:
If lusty love should go inquest of beauty,
Where should he find itfairer than in Blanch?
If zealous love should goin search of virtue,
Where should he find itpurer than in Blanch?
If love ambitious sought amatch of birth,
Whose veins bound richerblood than Lady Blanch?
Such as she is, in beauty,virtue, birth,
Is the young Dauphin everyway complete:
If not complete of, say heis not she;
And she again wantsnothing, to name want,
If want it be not that sheis not he:
He is the half part of ablessed man,
Left to be finished bysuch as she;
And she a fair dividedexcellence,
Whose fulness ofperfection lies in him.
O, two such silvercurrents, when they join,
Do glorify the banks thatbound them in;
And two such shores to twosuch streams made one,
Two such controlling boundsshall you be, kings,
To these two princes, ifyou marry them.
This union shall do morethan battery can
To our fast-closed gates;for at this match,
With swifter spleen thanpowder can enforce,
The mouth of passage shallwe fling wide ope,
And give you entrance: butwithout this match,
The sea enraged is nothalf so deaf,
Lions more confident,mountains and rocks
More free from motion, no,not Death himself
In moral fury half soperemptory,
As we to keep this city.
Here's a stay
That shakes the rottencarcass of old Death
Out of his rags! Here's alarge mouth, indeed,
That spits forth death andmountains, rocks and seas,
Talks as familiarly ofroaring lions
As maids of thirteen do ofpuppy-dogs!
What cannoneer begot thislusty blood?
He speaks plain cannonfire, and smoke and bounce;
He gives the bastinadowith his tongue:
Our ears are cudgell'd;not a word of his
But buffets better than afist of France:
Zounds! I was never sobethump'd with words
Since I first call'd mybrother's father dad.
Son, list to thisconjunction, make this match;
Give with our niece adowry large enough:
For by this knot thoushalt so surely tie
Thy now unsured assuranceto the crown,
That yon green boy shallhave no sun to ripe
The bloom that promiseth amighty fruit.
I see a yielding in thelooks of France;
Mark, how they whisper:urge them while their souls
Are capable of thisambition,
Lest zeal, now melted bythe windy breath
Of soft petitions, pityand remorse,
Cool and congeal again towhat it was.
Why answer not the doublemajesties
This friendly treaty ofour threaten'd town?
Speak England first, thathath been forward first
To speak unto this city:what say you?
If that the Dauphin there,thy princely son,
Can in this book of beautyread 'I love,'
Then Anjou and fairTouraine, Maine, Poictiers,
And all that we upon thisside the sea,
Except this city now by usbesieged,
Find liable to our crownand dignity,
Shall gild her bridal bedand make her rich
In titles, honours andpromotions,
As she in beauty,education, blood,
Holds hand with anyprincess of the world.
What say'st thou, boy?look in the lady's face.
I do, my lord; and in hereye I find a wonder,
or a wondrous miracle,
The shadow of myselfform'd in her eye:
Which being but the shadowof your son,
Becomes a sun and makesyour son a shadow:
I do protest I never lovedmyself
Till now infixed I beheldmyself
Drawn in the flatteringtable of her eye.
Drawn in the flatteringtable of her eye!
Hang'd in the frowningwrinkle of her brow!
And quarter'd in herheart! he doth espy
Himself love's traitor:this is pity now,
That hang'd and drawn andquartered, there should be
In such a love so vile alout as he.
My uncle's will in thisrespect is mine:
If he see aught in youthat makes him like,
That any thing he sees,which moves his liking,
I can with ease translateit to my will;
Or if you will, to speakmore properly,
I will enforce it easilyto my love.
Further I will not flatteryou, my lord,
That all I see in you isworthy love,
Than this; that nothing doI see in you,
Though churlishthoughts themselves
should be your judge,
That I can find shouldmerit any hate.
What say these young ones?What say you my niece?
That she is bound inhonour still to do
What you in wisdom stillvouchsafe to say.
Speak then, prince Dauphin;can'st thou love this lady?
Nay, ask me if I canrefrain from love;
For I do love her mostunfeignedly.
Then do I give Volquessen,Touraine, Maine,
Poictiers and Anjou, thesefive provinces,
With her to thee; and thisaddition more,
Full thirty thousand marksof English coin.
Philip of France, if thoube pleased withal,
Command thy son anddaughter to join hands.
It likes us well; youngprinces, close your hands.
And your lips too; for Iam well assured
That I did so when I wasfirst assured.
Now, citizens of Angiers,ope your gates,
Let in that amity whichyou have made;
For at Saint Mary's chapelpresently
The rites of marriageshall be solemnized.
Is not the Lady Constancein this troop?
I know she is not, forthis match made up
Her presence would haveinterrupted much:
Where is she and her son?tell me, who knows.
She is sad and passionateat your highness' tent.
And, by my faith, thisleague that we have made
Will give her sadness verylittle cure.
Brother of England, howmay we content
This widow lady? In herright we came;
Which we, God knows, haveturn'd another way,
To our own vantage.
We will heal up all;
For we'll create youngArthur Duke of Bretagne
And Earl of Richmond; andthis rich fair town
We make him lord of. Callthe Lady Constance;
Some speedy messenger bidher repair
To our solemnity: I trustwe shall,
If not fill up the measureof her will,
Yet in some measuresatisfy her so
That we shall stop herexclamation.
Go we, as well as hastewill suffer us,
To this unlook'd for,unprepared pomp.
Mad world! mad kings! madcomposition!
John, to stop Arthur'stitle in the whole,
Hath willingly departedwith a part,
And France, whose armourconscience buckled on,
Whom zeal and charitybrought to the field
As God's own soldier,rounded in the ear
With that same purpose-changer,that sly devil,
That broker, that stillbreaks the pate of faith,
That daily break-vow, hethat wins of all,
Of kings, of beggars, oldmen, young men, maids,
Who, having no externalthing to lose
But the word 'maid,' cheatsthe poor maid of that,
That smooth-faced gentleman,tickling Commodity,
Commodity, the bias of theworld,
The world, who of itselfis balanced well,
Made to run even upon evenground,
Till this advantage, thisvile-drawing bias,
This sway of motion, thisCommodity,
Makes it take head fromall indifferency,
From all direction,purpose, course, intent:
And this same bias, thisCommodity,
This bawd, this broker,this all-changing word,
Clapp'd on the outward eyeof fickle France,
Hath drawn him from hisown determined aid,
From a resolved andhonourable war,
To a most base andvile-concluded peace.
(laughing)
And why rail I on thisCommodity?
But for because he hathnot woo'd me yet:
Not that I have the powerto clutch my hand,
When his fair angels wouldsalute my palm;
But for that my hand, asunattempted yet,
Like a poor beggar,raileth on the rich.
Well, whiles I am abeggar, I will rail
And say there is no sinbut to be rich;
And being rich, my virtuethen will be
To say there is no vicebut beggary.
Since kings break faithupon commodity,
Gain, be my lord, for Iwill worship thee.